Today I'm interviewing Kathy Whitmire, mayor of
the city of Houston. Today is November 11, 1983.
First question. Kathy, do you feel that the people
of Houston, with their oil-dealing,
ranch-handed image of Houston, require a
different strategy for you as a female candidate
as opposed to, say, Jane Byrne of Chicago? Well, I
think every city is different. The electorate in
every city is different. tried to direct my
campaigns at the attitudes that I think prevail
with Houston's electorate, I'm sure that the ones
in Chicago are very different. Attitudes, which
ones prevail in Houston? Well, I've tried to
direct my campaigns at the people in Houston who
are generally younger and progressive and
open-minded, and that's how I see Houston as a a
city of relative newcomers with a relatively
young average age. What groups would you say have
posed more of a problem for you than, say, your male
counterparts? Groups who have posed more of a
problem for me than those same groups that have
posed for males? Say, a male mayor. A male mayor. I
don't know. I really don't make that much
distinction between women and men candidates or
elected officials. I think that it really depends
on the individual. And groups such as the police
union, who have been problematic in their
dealings with me, have been equally problematic
in their dealings with male mayors. And if I had
different positions on the issues, they probably
wouldn't I don't think the gender difference
makes that much difference. Does the fact of you
being a female allow you to detract or emphasize
the real issues of a campaign? If so, does this
enhance or hurt your posture, and how does it
affect voter turnout? Well, when I first started
running for office, the issue of being a female in a
city that had never elected a woman to any office in
some respects an advantage for me with the
electorate because there were a lot of people who
were interested in seeing a qualified female
elected to a public office, and I think that did
help the turnout, and it certainly helped recruit
volunteers to my campaign. At the same time, it
hurt fundraising for the campaign because there
was a general view that women would not be
successful. Did it allow you to detract or
emphasize the real issues of the campaign, do you
think? I think that there was initially some
indication or some tendency for the media to focus
more on my being female than on anything else, but
ultimately we overcame that and I think ran a very
issue-oriented campaign. In all three of the
campaigns that I've run, I think they've been very
issue-oriented. Does the media in any way detract
the importance of the issue or ignore certain
relevant responses you have towards them? And is
there a difference, say, in the way the Houston
Chronicle evaluates you as opposed to the Houston
Post? Well, in any circumstance, the news media is
going to put their own interpretation on the
issues. That's just the nature of the situation.
The Chronicle, unfortunately, has a tendency to
use their news pages to carry out their
editorials. position and they've done that in
both of my campaigns and during my administration
and I think that's unfortunate. The Post does not
take editorial positions on elections and as a
consequence they have more objective reporting.
And yet still the Chronicle remains the main paper
in Houston. What does that say? The Chronicle does
have the largest distribution and I imagine that
says that the people who are managing and editing
the Chronicle and handling its distribution are
doing a better job of their business, that is,
providing a product which will sell. A campaign
minority, say a black, Hispanic, or a gay, versus a
female, which receives more notice in an election
and why? Oh, I think it's probably about equal any
time.
A candidate is from some group that is not the
traditional white male candidate. There's a lot
of emphasis given to that. You may remember
occasions when Catholics have run for president.
There's been considerable attention given to a
member of a religious minority, so to speak. So I
think that there's not any real difference.
That's just one of the ways that people focus on
what's unique about this candidate, this
candidate's a woman or is Jewish or is Catholic or
is black or whatever. Obviously different
communities value certain qualities. Would you
explain Houston then and how you think they
evaluate a female versus, how would you comprise
Houston? Would you start at the beginning of that
again? Evaluate certain qualities. How would you
say Houston's in this respect then? Go back to what
the respect is. I didn't... I didn't really
understand what you started with. Different
communities value certain qualities above
others. Is it more important to be Mexican or be
female? How would you look at Houston in this
respect? I don't think those are the issues. I
don't think that Houston, as a voting group,
thinks it's more important to elect a member of any
minority group versus any other or to elect
someone who's not a member of a minority group. I
think that Houston's, that Houstonians on the
whole are looking for someone who is fiscal and
conservative. I find that almost across the board
that Houstonians want someone who will be
responsible in their management of money and that
that is a very, very high priority. And that
Houstonians are looking for a candidate who
appears to have the right qualifications and
credentials for the job. Even when it comes to
getting a black city council member as opposed to a
white? Well, I think certainly the black
community is interested in electing a black city
council member, but I don't find at the same time
that the white community is opposed to electing a
black city council member. So I thought you were
talking about the city as a whole. Does
campaigning force you to become more female or
more of a business person, sacrificing your
sexuality from 9 to 5? No, I don't think
campaigning forces you to do anything. Different
women have taken different approaches to how to
handle their gender in the campaign. I developed a
certain approach that certainly was not a
requirement and wouldn't be a requirement of
anyone who happens to be a female candidate. The
approach I took was that I was running for office
initially in 1977 on my business background. And
that was the basis of my campaign. And so I worked to
present a business-like image to go with that
business background. When you ran, it became an
issue of how you dressed. Do you think, obviously,
some men they dress what some people would term
outdated. Do you find it surprising that you're
given more attention than as opposed to how males
dress? And what was your reaction to this as
opposed to them focusing on the issues? Well, that
is one of the differences of being a female
candidate, that the press and the public at large
focus more on appearance of females than they do on
appearance of males, particularly on dress.
There's just a tendency to focus more on dress of
women in any in any profession or endeavor, not
just in politics. If a female wore a mud sling, how
would females view her as opposed to a male that
females would see mud sling? Well, I find that the
electorate in general does not appreciate mud
sling, whether it's done by a male or a female. I
don't know of any difference in whether A male
candidate or a female candidate engages in
mudslinging, I think in both cases it's generally
disliked. You don't see a difference between a
male being macho, brash? No, I think it's
generally a bad campaign strategy and in most
cases bad pers. Does a female, such as you, have to
assert her views more defined and firmer due to how
some females are viewed as being more
persuadable? Yes, I think that's probably true. I
think there's a tendency for people to assume that
a woman is not going to be decisive and
strong-willed, and I happen to be probably even
more strong-willed than I should be. So I have to
make sure that people are aware of that. How did
this affect how you laid down your campaign
promises, or did it? I don't think that it did.
Explain how you feel the impact
of the city having its first mayor affected its
image. Having its first female mayor? Oh, I think
that it certainly brought a degree of national
attention to the city that we didn't have before.
When you stop to think about the mayors of Houston
in the past, if you would have asked someone in
Chicago or Atlanta or Detroit who was the mayor of
Houston, they probably wouldn't know. If you
asked them today, they probably would know. So I
think it brought some extra attention to the city
that we didn't have before. Explain how your
expectations meet up to the reality of being in
office, differences and similarities. Well, the
surprises that I found in taking office as
mayor... had mostly to do with the extreme amount
of attention that I get from the news media, which I
really had not anticipated, and also with the
unique situation of finding out what it's like for
everyone to know who I am and finding that I have
completely lost my privacy and that everywhere I
go, everybody knows who I am. With regard to the
management of the office, the only thing that's
different from my expectation is that It really
seems to take longer to get things done than I had
hoped, because what I have found is that if you want
to be successful in the arena of government, you
have to check with everyone in advance before you
do anything, so that everyone is well-informed,
and it just takes longer than it should. Does the
fact that you are female seem to make you more or
less representative of establishment to such
groups which might feel oppressed by a power of the
elite? Say, how it... Yeah, I think I see what you
mean. And obviously, since women have not
traditionally been known as part of the power
establishment, the fact that I'm a woman makes
people who feel oppressed by that establishment
relate to me more easily. How strategic was the
appointment of the nationally credible black
police chief, Captain Brown, and was it
successful, and how would you gauge it such? Well,
the appointment of Chief Brown was not a strategy
that I planned in advance. That was a very
fortunate incident. When I found myself in need of
a new police chief very early on, I decided to have a
national search done. I, at that time, certainly
was not aware that there were any black police
chiefs, so I did not set out to look for one by any
means. And when we came down to the final
candidates that seemed to have a lot of potential,
it just so happened that one of them was Lee Brown,
who happens to be black. And I think that in the long
run that has proved to be a very, very good
decision, probably much better than I ever could
have anticipated due to his own personal
abilities and qualities. It was not something
that I had planned out in advance. I just set out to
find someone who I had confidence in and who could
make some reforms in the police department. And I
was fortunate to find someone who I believe will be
able to do that. For Police Chief Brown, you had
eight police chiefs in eight years. The city did.
The city did. Is that one of the criteria you would
say that has helped you measure them by? Or how
would you gauge its success? Would it be not being
in the papers being a plus? I would gauge his
success by being able to set some specific
measurable goals and attain those goals. And by
being able to gain the cooperation of people in the
department who initially didn't have any
intention of cooperating with him. By being able
to go from a time when members of council and
members of the employee organizations openly
said that they opposed his appointment to the time
now. where all of those people openly say that they
agree with his department and that they support
his leadership. Do you think that being a female
makes it easier or harder for you to gain
credibility with the police department?
Probably harder. Why? Because females have only
recently been allowed in the police department
and most current members of the department were
there at the time when they felt that women were
unqualified to do the kind of work they're doing,
and so it's easy for them to wonder whether women
are qualified to do the kind of work I'm doing. Do
you think that the council deals with a female
differently than a male? On June 15th, 1983, there
was put some term to riot, police department,
small. You mean in the council chambers? In the
council chambers where a few hundred came inside
were screaming obscenities. It seemed that
council really didn't support you. At least the
appearance was. Do you think if you'd have been a
male mayor, council would have handled the
situation a few differently? I don't think so at
all. I think every council member had their own
view of that situation and most of them are more
tolerant of disorderliness than I am. There was a
city ordinance requiring only a certain number of
people to be allowed in there and it was violated.
Why wasn't it able to be enforced? Because most
members of council are more tolerant of
disorderliness and believe it should not be
enforced. Even if it includes people screaming
obscenities at the mayor of the city of Houston?
Apparently so. Do you think that the males of the
city and on city council have something against
looking up to you or working under you as a female?
And how did you feel working under Jim O'Connor as a
female male? I don't think that that made any
difference. Business? Yeah, it was just a
business relationship. There's the fact that in
1977, it was the International Woman's Year and
they had their convention in Houston. Do you think
that that affects the use in Houston is how they
look at a female mayor? I'd say in Dallas, you used
to look at a female mayor if they had one? Probably
not. That was just one event on one weekend, and I
think most people in Houston have probably
forgotten about it by now. Do you feel the gay
community having a feminist posture, or at least a
feminist image in the eyes of society, is more
responsive to your policies, and do you feel that
you are more sympathetic, if not at least more
willing to listen to them, than a male who has to fit
the image of going against them to protect
himself? Not at all. I know many male politicians
who get along well with the gay community, and I
also know many men in the gay community who just
simply don't like women at all. What are the
special interest groups or, say, supporters that
would influence your politics, your policies? I
don't think special interest groups influence my
policies. Cameron Ironwork had to laugh between
2,000 and 2,500 workers. International Tool
Supply, out of 500 workers, had to laugh about 70%.
When you were mayor, you had to lay off less than 50
of the city's workers. Until the summer of 1982,
Houston's employment had been almost sheltered
until it caught up with the United States being
about 4% less originally. When this caught up with
Houston, did the city apportion you with an undue
amount of criticism? Oh, I don't think so.
Certainly my opponent in this last election took
advantage of the economic recession as something
to lay at my doorstep. And I think that any opponent
would have done that. That's part of running a
political campaign. You blame your opposition
with whatever you can. But I do not feel that I've
been unduly blamed for the national economic
recession. Do you think Houston's image has
strengthened among mayors and governors of the
United States? with a female as opposed to if a male
had accomplished the same results? Well I think I
certainly have a higher profile amongst mayors
and governors of the United States because I'm a
woman and I also have made it my business to take an
active part in national organizations of elected
officials and therefore I've become well known by
the other mayors around the country. How could the
administration be so out of touch with the voters
when it came to the vote on the Metropolitan
Transit Authority bonds, especially when our
congressman in DC was even so surprised at the
city's action when everyone knew it would be
defeated. Well, I don't know whether everyone
knew it would be defeated. I still think that there
was a strategic mistake made in calling that
election at a time when only a few people would be
voting because I think that the majority of the
voters, The majority of the voters had been in the
polls that we passed. It was the low turnout that
caused it to be defeated. So you're saying that you
were in touch with the voters, it's just the ones
that you were in touch with didn't show up? Yeah, I
think that's true. A very small percentage of the
people voted, and they all came from a very
specific segment of the city. They were all older
voters, older and affluent voters. And if there
had been a large turnout, such as the turnout that
voted this week in the mayor's race, I think it
probably would have passed. Will the same vote be
taken to the people again? Not the same, no.
Similar? What's going to be done is the various
alternatives for public transportation systems
are going to be reviewed in community meetings
around the city to try to get an advanced view of
what kind of support there is for the various
alternatives. San Francisco recently passed an
ordinance which forbid any smoking in offices,
restaurants, and all public facilities. San
Francisco also has a female mayor, Mayor
Feinstein. Do you think you could pass the same
sort of legislation in Houston that would, being a
female, have any difference in if you tried to pass
it as a male? No, I don't think there's any
difference in a male or a female advocating for
that particular legislation. I haven't really
reviewed it, so I don't know whether I would want to
pass that particular legislation.
With respect to your relationships with city
council, do you feel like you're treated as a
gentlewoman or as just another one of the guys on
city council? And what would your preference be?
I'm treated as another one of the guys, and that is
my preference. Do different factions of media,
say papers as opposed to radio, Do different
factions measure you differently? Oh, not
intentionally. I think each type of media has a
different approach. The newspapers, the
reporters for the newspapers are always much
better informed and get involved in the specifics
of the issues much more than the broadcast media.
The television people are generally looking for
something that's sensational, and that just
relates to what their audiences want. What are the
advantages and disadvantages a female office
holder deals with when it comes to getting the job
done that you can attribute to being, that you can
attribute to sexual honor? There are really not
any. I'm not a big believer that either men or women
are automatically more qualified to do
something. I think that every person is an
individual and has to be considered as such. Well,
they might not be more qualified, but do you think
that there still are any things that hold you back
in certain areas that, despite qualifications,
you're not able to achieve? No. Do you think that we
as a nation are past the point where we examine
females in public to see whether we should move
from the testing point and allow it to not hinge on
gender anymore? No, I don't think we're to that
point yet. I think that there's still a small
enough number of women officials that people like
me still do get an inordinate amount of public
attention because we serve as a role model or an
example of what women are like in public office. Do
you think we'll ever have a female president?
Certainly. How soon? I don't know. No guesses? No.
All things happen eventually. You went to school
in the Houston Independent School District,
HISD. You went to San Jacinto High School. What is
your feeling then and what is your feeling now on
the quality of the education? Well, I think I got a
good education in HISD. I knew at the time that
there were some differences in the level of
educational opportunity that was provided at
different schools. When I graduated from high
school, generally, Bel Air High School was
thought to be the most advanced, and their
students had the opportunity to take the most
advanced courses. San Jacinto was not really in
the same league with Bel Air, but at the same time, I
felt I had the opportunity to get a good education
there. I'm sure there are still those
differences. I saw that in the late 60s and early
70s, there was a lot of decline in the quality of
education in HISD and specifically in the quality
of discipline. And I think that in the last 10
years, we have seen some improvements. We've seen
some improvements in the type of opportunities
that are provided through the magnet program and
through the VANDVARD program. And we're
beginning to see some improvements in the
discipline, which I think is very important.
Administrators have typically been males while
the teachers of America's grade schools have
typically been females. How has HSD's weak image
affected your dealings with the administration
of this system? Well, I really don't have a lot of
dealings with the administration of the school
system since they are an independent school
district and not subject to any policy
determinations from the city.
Does being a woman help bolster public opinion in
your favor when you at least say your feelings
towards education? I really don't take public
positions on education very often since it's not
within the realm of responsibilities that the
city has. Governor White has a strong stance on
education. Have you had any dealings with
Governor White on this issue? I have had a lot of
dealings with Governor White, mostly on other
issues. I have talked with him about his views on
education and certainly respect his views as a
strong supporter of education. What are your
views? I think that the public school system is one
of the most important aspects of what a city offers
to its citizens and that it is extremely important
to be able to provide a quality education for the
public school system. Have we achieved that
quality? I think there is still room for
improvement, and I think that while Governor
White is working actively to improve pay scales
for teachers, that there are two things that are
going to have to be done to ultimately attract the
kind of quality people that we need and retain them
in education. One of those is that we're going to
have to have year-round school, because you can't
expect someone to make a living on a nine-month
salary, and you can't expect them to earn a
12-month salary if they only work nine months. So
that's one thing that's going to have to change.
And the other thing that's going to have to change
is that teachers are going to have to be
compensated according to merit. They can't just
be compensated across the board and expect to
retain big performers. Do you believe in paying
teachers according to ability or according to
years? According to ability. Do you think that
that will be possible in HISD? I certainly hope so.
And once again, that's not one of the things that
comes under the jurisdiction of the city. So what
I'm offering is just my personal opinion. Do you
feel that women are more comprehensible or are
more sympathetic towards education since they
have the image of being the teachers of our nation?
Well, that's certainly conventional wisdom,
that women are more interested in education. On
the other hand, I find that many business people
are extremely aware of the importance of quality
education, and many businessmen are aware of
that. Houston has traditionally, at least in the
eyes of the public, had a poor school system by
national standards. It was nationally ranked
18th out of the 22 largest metropolitan cities,
and it's ranked in the top five, with Dallas being
second in the segregation of the school district.
What sort of long-term goals do you think should be
set for HISD And how do you think the strength and
quality of the Spring Branch Independent School
District fits into a picture like this? Well, of
course, both the Spring Branch School District
and the Houston Independent School District, as
well as a couple of others, are included within the
City of Houston. And my hope is that all of those
school districts can set some very high standards
for the type of educational opportunity that is
provided for young people growing up in Houston
because I think that public education is just
extremely important and that a higher emphasis
needs to be placed on educational achievement
than we have seen perhaps in the past. What do you
think has allowed Spring Branch Independent
School District to obviously surpass a quality
education in HISD? I'm not really aware that it has
surpassed HISD. Perhaps it has, I'm just not
informed. Do you think it's all in the games of
economics? Well, I really couldn't comment on it
since I don't necessarily know that the premise is
true. Explain your relationship with Billy
Reagan and how you evaluate him in his job. Well, my
relationship with Billy Reagan is a good one. We
have a good working relationship on the issues
that we have in common. The city has some
contractual relationships with the school
district. for the collection of taxes and the
appraisal of tax property, and we do work together
from the standpoint of planning our tax
situation. We also have a few other programs that
we've worked on jointly with regard to
after-school programs in cooperation with our
Parks Department and the Houston Independent
School District. I think that during the years
that Billy Reagan has been with the Houston
Independent School District, he has
accomplished some significant improvements in
the programming and in the quality of education.
And I'm generally a supporter of his. Do you think
he's coming towards the end of his ability to
justify his existence in the school system? Or do
you think that he has a lot more to offer? I think he
has more to offer.
On June 15, 1983, you had an incident with the
police department. The Houston Police
Department is the second highest paid in the
nation behind Los Angeles. But in real terms, LA
has a higher cost of living. And so Houston's the
highest paid police department. They seem to put
out an image of being rednecks and providing low
quality service. And the city's very aware of this
image. Do you think that this image, do you think
that the frustration that they feel, do you think
that that was shown in the council meeting, would
you like to explain why you think the
circumstances came to be? I don't think the
incident in the council meeting has anything to do
with their image. I think it had entirely to do with
the union leaders who were unable to get
acquiescence from this administration for their
financial demands, both in terms of pay and
benefits. And that's really what it was about.
Now, on the subject of HPD's image. They have had a
bad national image in the past, but I think since
Chief Brown has been here, we have seen some
improvement in that image. We've seen some
improvement in the professional standards in the
department, and I'm looking forward to more
improvements in the future. Being in real terms
the highest paid department in the nation, were
their demands justified? No. Why not? Because of
what you just explained, that they already are the
highest paid in the nation, and Obviously, I think
we all understand that the job of a union leader
under any circumstance is to go out and fight for
higher pay and higher benefits, no matter how high
they already are. And those union leaders were
trying to do their job in their regard.